---
date: '2025-09-01T08:31:37-05:00'
draft: true
title: 'Fork Proof Load Control System Redesign (2025)'
weight: 1
---

## Project Background
Every carbon fiber bicycle fork made by Trek undergoes a test known as the *Fork Proof Load Test*, where the fork is held at a standard load for 60 seconds, and the permanent deflection of the fork is measured. Forks with a permanent deflection above a certain value must be scrapped. The overall rate of scrapped forks is extremely low. 

There were multiple factors at play that led to this project:
* Due to learnings from the [Fork Proof Load Data Analysis](../03-fpldata2024) there was a desire to reprogram the control system to have a more robust data capture, storage, and upload system. 
* Although the electrical redesign accomplished during [Fork Proof Load Electrical Redesign (2023-2024)](../04-fpl2023) was a major improvement over [Fork Proof Load Mechanical Redesign (2021)](../07-fpl2021), and achieved the goals of the project within the constraints of the project (i.e. utilizing the existing Horner Control System and LabVIEW PC program) ,the end result was electrically complicated. A simpler electrical design was needed for ease of assembly and future maintenance efforts. 
* The recent decision to move to Beckhoff as our control system platform showed there were new opportunities that came from that system that would alleviate many issues within the FPL control system design
* A new supplier factory was opening which required a solution quickly

The machine needed to be assembled quickly, but also needed upgrades to the control system because we did not want to risk any more data errors with any more machines due to their importance. The decision was made to refurbish an existing prototype of the FPL machine and retrofit a new control system onto the framework.

## Key Components of the Project

#### Framework Retrofit / Refurbishment

#### Electrical System Redesign

#### Control System Redesign

#### Integration with Existing Tulip-powered Database

#### Pneumatic Circuit Redesign


