---
date: '2025-09-01T08:33:01-05:00'
draft: true
title: 'Test Database and Applications (2021-2023)'
weight: 8
---
## Project Background
The project scope initially was just for the creation of a tablet-based application which could upload photos and test data and associate the two correctly on the backend. After performing an analysis of the complete testing environment, it became clear a much larger project was needed to satisfy the requirements. 

The Test Department at Trek handles thousands of test plans per year, each with potentially dozens of samples, with each sample going through potentially dozens of tests. Tens of thousands of data points are created each year. Previously all test data was managed via siloed Excel sheets for each test plan, making analysis across test plans extremely time consuming, and creating numerous other problems with managing the large amount of data and creating consistent formatting, among other issues.

## Project Deliverables
In 2021 the first prototype was created and tested in Test Lab at Trek Headquarters in Waterloo, Wisconsin. Based on findings of the first prototype, a near-complete rewrite of the applications was done and a second prototype was completed in 2022. Testing of the second prototype began in Waterloo, Wisconsin and an additional Trek Test Lab in Taiwan in summer of 2022 and additional changes and improvements were made. In Q4 I managed the system roll out to 12 other Test Labs around the world. Test Lab Managers and suppliers were informed they had until Q2 of 2023 to learn the system and completely transition from the old methods of data reporting. In Q2 of 2023 the system went live and has been running smoothly for over two years, with no relapse to the previous system. 

Minimum of 3000 person hours saved per year, leading to an increase in testing throughput globally.

## Main Project Features

#### Tulip.co-based Applications and Database
Three applications were developed for the project to be used by end-users and numerous applications were developed for use by Test Department staff to manage the test database of (currently) over 400 tests utilized in product testing.

#### Python REST API
A Python REST API was created and hosted on Heroku to expand the native capabilities of Tulip, particularly regarding large batch record processing.

#### Python Applications and Scripts
Two Python-based applications were developed for use by the end-users; one to convert test data into an Excel sheet that could be utilized for the official record of test results and another to download and appropriately name photos associated with sample test data. Numerous other Python scripts were developed for use by Test Department engineers to facilitate various interacts with the tulip.co REST API.

